---
layout: post
title: No retirement for me
date: 2015-05-14
comments: true
---

When I left my job to try some new avenues, I got some decent
investment offers for my ideas, but I decided that doing some
consulting work to sustain myself was better when I didn't even have a
concrete plan. My ideas for a product didn't quite materialize since I
gradually started losing my excitement for them. Meanwhile, I was also
getting some decent projects to work on as a part of my consulting
gig. So far, I have worked on some really great projects and I've had
a lot of fun. Along the way, I started getting more and more offers
for work, which is great, by the way. Especially because I get to
choose which projects to work on without having to worry about getting
my next meal. Which means that I let some of those projects go
by. Which also means that I'm not earning as much as I could. On the
other hand, whatever time I get in exchange for that, I spend it on
other things that I want to do. During this last year, I started
traveling more, I am reading and learning more, and I even started
this blog.

The question of finances sometimes comes up while having a chat with
friends or relatives. I think they feel concerned because I don't have
a "job". I ended up mentioning that I wasn't taking up some projects
that could pay good money in order to spend more time on doing other
things like learning mathematics, and traveling . When this comes up,
I generally get a suggestion that I should accept those projects,
regardless of whether or not I'd enjoy them, so that I can retire
early and do those other things later. I think I understand the
psychology behind this. I mean, I have read enough psychology books to
become cocky. I understand that we want to wrap things up and then
have some leisure time without any distractions. Nice, clean
breaks. That's probably why everyone starts getting into a bad mood on
the last day of the vacation, or even the Sunday evenings.

I have decided, against all the nasty stuff my brain throws at me,
fears and insecurities, that this might not be a really great
idea. It doesn't work apparently. If the years I have spent with this
mortal coil, and the things I have read, seen and heard are any
indication at all, I think this plan has never worked, not even if you are
the fuckin' William H. Gates III.

I also don't think that I want to retire. Regardless of how boring it
sometimes gets, and it does get boring sometimes, I derive a lot of
satisfaction from the better parts of my work. I also think that our
sense of self-worth, the confidence, comes only from doing good,
productive work, and that confidence spills into all the other areas
in our lives.

Too much of leisure time also begins to feel boring. Like having a
fourth serving of your favorite pastry. People who have a lot of free
time are the people who are waiting for the updates of the like-count
on their facebook post. These are the people who become dependent on
others to build their confidence. And it's always a disaster. When
people are overworked, I think they dream of running away from it all,
permanently. I think most of them underestimate how much their work
contributes to their overall happiness. Even if it's a crappy job, I
know people who do it well enough and find ways out of it or make it
worthwhile. And as the legendary geek Amar Bose [said][amar-bose], job
is what you make it[^1]. I tend to enjoy my free time more if I have
been productive. And by productive, I just don't mean earning
money. It could be learning math, learning to invest, or even writing
a blog post.

I know how important money is. I grew up on Ayn Rand[^2] for fuck's
sake and some ideas have stuck. I spent 3 whole weeks to learn
investing; By going through 3 books, a lot of statistics and a
microeconomics course. Doing something that pays your bills is
extremely important. And no matter what your hobbies are, be it
climbing the Everest, or trolling others on the internet, everything
requires money. So, I have no delusions about that. All I am saying is
that hoarding money so that you can retire comfortably and sail into
the sunset with your trophy wife is a dream that generally fails to
materialize.

This is also **not** an argument against hard work. I think hard work
is fun. At least the end result is. Most of the time, whenever I have
needed to push myself hard to get something done, it has always been a
pleasure. I have worked through weekends, stayed long nights and
logged 60 hours of work on 40 hour contracts. Those have always been
good times, and the end results have been fulfilling.  Good work, and
the subsequent feeling of accomplishment, is probably the biggest
thing contributing to my happiness. And I have been through a brief
period when I didn't get my hands on problems that required me to work
or think hard for them. Those weren't exactly fun times.

When I say that I don't want to retire, I don't mean to say that I
will always continue to be a programmer. I think that will depend on a
lot of factors. It might get old. And the world is changing too fast
to make that kind of plans over a 5 year horizon. Although, it does
look like programming will continue to fit the bill for the
foreseeable future. It continues to be challenging and there are
always new, exciting things to learn and do, and it pays reasonably
well.

However, when that inevitable robot revolution comes in 2045, things
may get out of hand. It could end well, and we may live in peace with
the robots. And in that scenario, maybe I'll take up a teaching job
because I obviously won't be able to compete with the robots in
programming; specifically because they would be able to sit in the
same chair for a week straight, unlike me, who would have to get up
every hour to stretch my human legs. They also wouldn't need to spend
time on reddit arguing over whether to use vi or emacs because they
wouldn't even need a text editor, let alone syntax highlighting or
auto completion. I am resting my hopes on the idea that the kids
wouldn't want to be taught by the robots who took away their parents'
jobs.  If it's a dystopian world, ala The Matrix, maybe Morpheus will
pick me up to fix the shitty parts on the Nebuchandnezzar; and I'll be
ready for that since I'm learning to do some mechanic work.

The point is, I don't want to make that doomed-to-fail plan where I
work on whatever pays the most money for 20 years, hoping for a happy
retirement. I want to keep working for as long as I can. But I mostly
want to choose work based on its quality, rather than the size of the
paycheck. I'm okay with a little less money. My leisure time
mostly involves traveling, reading or learning some new stuff. And
since all of that requires at least some mental and physical
abilities, I guess I'll be able to work for them as long as it's
possible for me to enjoy them. After that, I wouldn't care.

## Footnotes

[^1]: If you haven't seen [that video][amar-bose] yet, I highly
    recommend you do so. For one, Amar Bose is one those ultimate
    geeks. The reflections are priceless. It's actually so good, I was
    tempted to take that entire course in acoustics. You can ignore
    the first few minutes probably where he does a demo of an
    acoustics problem. The rest is, I repeat, priceless.

[^2]: I know that some of her fiction work involved some really lame
    stuff. I don't care. I think the central ideas about fair
    exchange of values and the inevitability of reality are solid.


[amar-bose]: https://youtu.be/N2UhSnvOcaE?t=3283
