---
layout: post
title: Some offhand notes on working
date: 2015-05-14
comments: true
---

When I left my job to try some new stuff, I got some decent investment
offers, but I decided that doing some consulting work to sustain
myself was better when I didn't even have a concrete plan. My ideas
for a product didn't quite materialize since I gradually started
losing my excitement for them. Meanwhile, I was also getting some
decent projects to work on as a freelancer. So far, I have worked on
some really great projects and I've had a lot of fun. After some time, I
started getting more and more offers for work, which is great, by the
way. Especially because I get to choose which projects to work on
without having to worry about getting my next paycheck. Which means that I
let some of those projects go by. Which also means that I'm not
earning as much as I could. On the other hand, whatever time I get in
exchange for that, I spend it on other things that I want to
do. In last one year, I started traveling more, I am reading and
learning more, and I even started this, however badly written, blog.

The question of finances sometimes comes up while talking with
friends or relatives. I think they feel concerned because I don't have
a "job". I ended up mentioning that I wasn't taking up some projects
that could pay good money in order to spend more time on doing other
things, like learning math, and traveling . When this comes up,
I am sometimes told that I should accept those projects,
regardless of whether or not I'd enjoy them, so that I can retire
early and do those other things later. I think I understand the
idea behind this. I understand that we want to wrap things up and then
have some leisure time without any distractions. Nice, clean
breaks. That's probably why everyone starts getting into a bad mood on
the last day of the vacation, or even the Sunday evenings.

I have decided, despite all the stuff my brain throws at me, fears and
insecurities, that this might not be a really great idea. It doesn't
work apparently. If the things I have read, seen and heard are any
indication at all, I think this plan has never worked, not even if you
are William H. Gates III.

But the main thing is that I don't want to retire. Regardless of how
boring the work sometimes gets, and it does get boring sometimes. I
get a lot of satisfaction from the better parts of my work. I also
think that most of my confidence comes only from doing good,
productive work, and that confidence spills into all the other areas
in my life.

Too much of leisure time also begins to feel a little boring. Like
having a fourth serving of your favorite pastry. People who have a lot
of free time are the people who are waiting for the updates of the
like-count on their facebook posts. These are the people who become
dependent on others to build their confidence. And it's always a
disaster. When people are overworked, I think they dream of running
away from it all, permanently. I think most of them underestimate how
much their work contributes to their overall happiness. Even if it's a
crappy job, I know people who do it well enough and find ways out of
it or make it worthwhile. And as the legendary geek Amar Bose
[said][amar-bose], job is what you make it[^1]. I tend to enjoy my
free time more if I have been productive. And by productive, I just
don't mean earning money. It could be learning math, learning to
invest, teaching to somebody, or even writing a blog post.

I know how important money is. I even grew up on Ayn Rand[^2] and some
ideas have stuck. I have been spending quite a bit of time to learn
investing; By going through several books, a lot of statistics and a
microeconomics course. Doing something that pays your bills is
extremely important. And no matter what your hobbies are, be it
climbing the Everest, or trolling others on the internet, everything
costs money. So, I have no delusions about that. All I am saying is
that hoarding money so that you can retire comfortably and sail into
the sunset with your trophy wife, is a dream that generally fails to
materialize.

This is also **not** an argument against hard work. I think hard work
is fun, and deeply satisfying. Most of the time, whenever I've had to
push myself hard to get something done, it has always been a
pleasure. I have worked through weekends, stayed long nights and
logged 60 hours of work on 40 hour contracts. Those have always been
good times, and the end results have been fulfilling.  Good work, and
the subsequent feeling of accomplishment, is probably the biggest
thing contributing to my happiness.

When I say that I don't want to retire, I don't mean to say that I
will always continue to be a programmer. I think that will depend on a
lot of factors. It might get old. And the world is changing too fast
to make that kind of plans over a 5 year horizon. Although, it does
look like programming will continue to fit the bill for the
foreseeable future. It continues to be challenging and there are
always new, exciting things to learn and do, and it pays reasonably
well.

However, when that inevitable robot revolution comes in 2045, things
may get out of hand. It could end well, and we may live in peace with
the robots. And in that scenario, maybe I'll take up a teaching job
because I obviously won't be able to compete with the robots in
programming; specifically because they would be able to sit in the
same chair for a week straight, unlike me, who would have to get up
every hour to stretch my human legs. They also wouldn't need to spend
time on reddit arguing over whether to use vi or emacs because they
wouldn't even need a text editor, let alone syntax highlighting or
auto completion. I am resting my hopes on the idea that the kids
wouldn't want to be taught by the robots who took away their parents'
jobs.  If it's a dystopian world, ala The Matrix, maybe Morpheus will
pick me up to fix the shitty parts on the Nebuchandnezzar; and I'll be
ready for that since I'm learning to do some mechanic work.

The point is, I don't want to make that doomed-to-fail plan where I
work on whatever pays the most money for 20 years, hoping for a happy
retirement. I want to keep working for as long as I can. But I mostly
want to choose work based on its quality, rather than the size of the
paycheck. I'm okay with a little less money. My leisure time mostly
involves traveling, reading or learning some new stuff. And since all
of that requires at least some mental and physical abilities, I guess
I'll be able to work for them as long as it's possible for me to enjoy
them. After that, [I wouldn't care][being-mortal].

## Footnotes

[^1]: If you haven't seen [that video][amar-bose] yet, I highly
    recommend you do so. For one, Amar Bose is one ultimate
    nerd. The reflections are priceless. It's actually so good, I was
    tempted to take that entire course in acoustics. You can ignore
    the first few minutes probably where he does a demo of an
    acoustics problem. The rest is, I repeat, priceless.

[^2]: I know that some of her fiction work involved some really lame
    stuff. I don't care. I think the central ideas about fair
    exchange of values and the inevitability of reality are solid.


[amar-bose]: https://youtu.be/N2UhSnvOcaE?t=3283
[being-mortal]: https://www.amazon.com/Being-Mortal-Medicine-What-Matters/dp/0805095152
